## Udacity Data Engineering Project : Data Modeling with Postgres
The objective of this project is to create a analytical database for a music startup sparkify. The goal is to identify which songs users are listening to and how people are interacting with the sparkify music listening app.

## Introduction
In this project a analytical database is created on Postgre Sql. Currently the data is present in json and csv files. So a ETL job is developed that takes data from files, transform it and push the data into fact and dimension tables present in database, so that data can be easily analysed.

## Project Scope
The analytics Team wants to analyze the behaviour of users on sparkify app.

Following things can be analyzed:
1. Most heared song
2. Most liked artist
3. Usage and Artist Distribution by country
4. No. of paid subscribers
5. Distribution of gender in users
6. Where more money needs to be invested to increase the engagement of users
... and many more

## Data Required for Project
#### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/) Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset:
```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```
And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like:
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```
#### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset:
```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```
## Data Model
Using the song and log datasets, data is transformed into Star Schema, so that it can be queries easily and easily understandable to analysts and business users.
The resulting star schema consists of one fact table and four dimension tables.
##### Fact Table
- **songplays:** records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page ```NextSong```
    - **fsongplay_id:** unique id for each songplay event
    - **start_time:** start time of event (timestamp)
    - **user_id:** user_id of user
    - **level:** it shows user is paid subscriber or not
    - **song_id:** id of the played song
    - **artist_id:** id of artist
    - **session_id:** id of the current session
    - **location:** location of artist
    - **user_agent:** device/software to access sparkify app

##### Dimension Tables
- **users:** users in the app
    - **user_id:** unique id of user
    - **first_name:** first name of user
    - **last_name:** last name of user
    - **gender:** gender of user
    - **level:** it shows user is paid subscriber or not
- **songs:** songs in music database
    - **song_id:** unique id of song
    - **title:** name of the song
    - **artist_id:** id of artist
    - **year** year in which song is created
    - **duration:** duration of song in seconds
- **artists:** artists in music database
    - **artist_id:** unique id of artist
    - **name:** name of the artist
    - **location:** location of the artist
    - **latitude** latitude of artist location
    - **longitude:** longitude of artist location
- **time:** timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
    - **start_time:** start time timestamp
    - **hour:** hour of event
    - **day:** day of event
    - **week** week of event
    - **month:** month of event
    - **year:** year of event
    - **weekday:** weekday of event
## ETL Job
Data is fetched from source, then data is transformed according to requirements and then pushed into tables present in database.
#### Data Transformations
- Song plays events are filtered based on page value as ```NextSong```
- Timestamps are converted from UNIX time format to datetime format
- Datetime field is divided into chunks to create time dimension table

## Project Files
This project contains five files:
1. **test.ipynb:** displays the first few rows of each table to check your the database.
2. **create_tables.py:** drops and creates the tables. This file should be executed before ETL job to reset tables.
3. **etl.ipynb:** reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into your tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.
4. **etl. py:** reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into the tables.
5. **sql_queries.py:** contains all the sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.

## Project Execution
#### Steps
1. Create database and all tables
    ```
    python create_tables.py
    ```
2. Execute etl job
    ```
    python etl.py
    ```
## Analytical Queries
1. Number of distinct users using sparkify app : There are 96 Unique Users
	```
	select count(distinct user_id) from songplays;
	```
2. Number of session created : 776 Unique Sessions Created
	```
	select count(distinct session_id) from songplays;
	```
3. Number of songs created by each artist : Only 2 artists created 2 songs, others 67 created only 1 song
	```
	select count(distinct session_id) from songplays;
	```
